withlock(1) -- locking wrapper script
=====================================

## SYNOPSIS

`withlock` <lockfile> <command> [<args>...]<br>
`withlock` [`-w <seconds>`|`--wait`=<seconds>] [`-q`|`--quiet`] [`-v`|`--verbose`] <lockfile> <command> [<args>...]<br>
`withlock` [`-h`|`--help`]<br>
`withlock` [`--version`]


## DESCRIPTION

withlock(1) is a wrapper script to make sure that some program isn't run
more than once. It is ideal to prevent periodic jobs spawned by cron(8) from
stacking up.

It uses locks that are valid only while the wrapper is running, and thus will
*never* require additional cleanup, even after a system crash or reboot. This
makes the wrapper safe and easy to use, and better than implementing
half-hearted locking within scripts.

The script can wait a defined time for a lock to become "free".


## SECURITY

Lockfiles, generally, MUST NOT be placed in a publicly writable directory,
because that would allow for a symlink attack. For that reason, withlock(1)
simply disallows lockfiles in such locations.


## OPTIONS

  * `-v`, `--verbose`:
    Print debug messages to stderr.
  
  * `-q`, `--quiet`:
    If lock can't be acquired immediately, silently quit without error.
  
  * `--version`:
    Show program's version number and exit.
  
  * `-h`, `--help`:
    Show command synopsis and exit.
  
  * `-w` <seconds>, `--wait`=<seconds>:
    Wait for maximum <seconds> for the lock to be acquired.


## EXAMPLES

Instead of your command 

    <command> [<args>...]

you simply use

    withlock <lockfile> <command> [<args>...]

cron(8) jobs, especially long running ones, are frequently run under withlock(1).
Here's an example:


    -*/10 * * * *   root     withlock LOCK-serverstatus /usr/bin/log_server_status2
    43 5,17 * * *   mirror   withlock LOCK-rsync-edu-isos rsync -rlptoH --no-motd rsync.opensuse-education.org::download/ISOs/ /srv/mirrors/opensuse-education/ISOs -hi



## HISTORY

This wrapper was implemented because no comparable solution was found even
after looking around for a long time (and suffering problems caused by missing
or insufficient locking for years). The only solution that comes close is
with-lock-ex.c, an implementation in C, which was written by Ian Jackson and
placed in the public domain by him. with-lock-ex.c is traditionally available
on Debian in a package named chiark-utils-bin. Parts of withlock's locking
strategy and parts of the usage semantics were inspired from that program. This
implementation was chosen to be done in Python because it's universally
available, easy to adapt, and doesn't require to be compiled.

Then, somebody pointed out to me that there's flock(1), a small tool written in
C that does the same. Indeed, I had apparently managed to miss that tool during
a decade's worth of Linux hacking (you discover something new every day, don't
you?). The functionality is mainly the same indeed. 

However, withlock(1) has some advantages:

- withlock(1) ist a little easier and logical to use than flock(1). The
  semantics are more suited for sysadmins.
- withlock(1) always cleans up it's lock files. flock(1) always lets them lying
  around. I admit that I like the fact that with withlock(1) I can always see
  by the presence of the lock files which jobs are running.
- flock(1) doesn't prevent using unsafe directories
- withlock(1) is easily extensible
- it could be used as a Python module (not implemented so far)
- flock(1) doesn't exist on Solaris and OSX


## BUGS


withlock(1) has been tested on many platforms, including Debian, Ubuntu,
openSUSE, CentOS, Fedora, FreeBSD, OSX, OpenCSW Solaris and is in production
use since 2009. There don't seem to be race conditions (the author tried very
hard to break it) but there are no guarantees.




## AUTHOR  

This program was written by Peter Pöml <peter@poeml.de> in 2009. 

## SEE ALSO  

flock(1)  
with-lock-ex(1) from Debian package chiark-utils-bin
